# THE STRANGE AND AWFUL PATH OF PRODUCTIVITY IN THE U.S. CONSTRUCTION SECTOR

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
Austan Goolsbee
Chad Syverson
Working Paper 30845
http://www.nber.org/papers/w30845

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2023, Revised February 2023

The Strange and Awful Path of Productivity in the U.S. Construction Sector
Austan Goolsbee and Chad Syverson
NBER Working Paper No. 30845
January 2023, Revised February 2023
JEL No. D2,E23,L7

ABSTRACT
Aggregate data show a large and decades-long decline in construction sector productivity. This
decline in such a large sector has had a material effect on secular productivity growth for the
economy as a whole. Prior work has focused on the role of potential measurement problems in
construction, particularly output deflators in the measurement of productivity. This paper brings
some new evidence to bear on the industry’s measured productivity problems and suggests that
measurement error is probably not the sole source of the stagnation. First, using measures of
physical productivity in housing construction, productivity is falling or, at best, stagnant over
multiple decades. Second, there has been a noticeable decline over time in the efficiency with
which construction firms translate materials inputs into output, and a corresponding shift toward
more value-added-intensive production. Third, using state-level data, we do not find evidence of
patterns of within-industry reallocation that might be expected of efficiently operating input and
output markets. States with more productive construction sectors do not see growth in their shares
of total U.S. construction activity; if anything, their shares fall. This may point to frictions in
these markets that slow or stop what is in many other markets an important channel for
productivity growth.

Austan Goolsbee
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
goolsbee@chicagobooth.edu

Chad Syverson
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
chad.syverson@chicagobooth.edu

Aggregate productivity growth is the prime determinant of long-run
growth in income per capita, and an economy’s productivity growth reflects the
productivity growth rates of the industries and sectors within it.
Yet despite decided growth in aggregate productivity for the U.S.
economy as a whole, the U.S. construction sector has diverged considerably.
Indeed, for decades now, measures of labor and total factor productivity (TFP)
in the sector have trended downward. To be clear, the raw BEA data suggest
that the sector has become less productive over time. A lot less productive:
value added per worker in the sector was about 40 percent lower in 2020 than
it was in 1970.

Economic researchers have remarked on these troubling patterns before;
see, e.g., Stokes (1981), Allen (1985), Schriver and Bowlby (1985), Sveikauskas
et al. (2016, 2018), and contemporaneous work by Garcia and Molloy (2022).
The problem has also attracted the attention of broader analysts and
audiences; see Changali et al. (2015), Economist (2017), Potter (2021), and
Smith (2021) for examples. A great deal of attention has gone to the issue of
whether measurement problems explain the sector’s disappointing
performance.

In this paper, we update some of this previous work and extend it to
some new data sources and hypotheses. Together, these new approaches seem
to reinforce the view that the poor performance is not just a figment of
measurement error. We see similar stagnation using physical measures of
productivity that are not dependent on price deflators. We also see that firms’
abilities to turn materials into output has deteriorated and we document real
issues with the sector’s adjustment mechanisms; there is little reallocation
from low productivity places to high-productivity places.


## The Core Issue with Construction Productivity

Figure 1 shows indexes of U.S. construction sector labor productivity and
TFP from 1950 to 2020. For comparison, it also plots the same indexes for the
overall economy.[^1]

Throughout the 1950s and well into the 1960s, both measures of
construction sector productivity grew steadily. Indeed, they outpaced their
whole-economy counterparts during that period. By 1970, however, the
construction sector’s labor productivity and TFP had both begun to fall. This
downturn was not temporary; the decline has continued for the past halfcentury.
This downturn did not mirror the economy-wide productivity pattern.
Productivity in the entire economy grew throughout the period (albeit with
some well-documented accelerations and decelerations). By 2020, while
aggregate labor productivity and TFP were 290 percent and 230 percent higher
than in 1950, both measures of construction productivity had fallen below
their 1950 values.

This is stunningly bad productivity performance for a major sector. It is
brought into special relief when compared to the over nine-fold increase in
labor productivity the manufacturing sector experienced during the same
period. Manufacturing, like construction, deals with the configuration and
assembly of physical objects in preparation for use as either inputs into
production or final consumption. Yet the two sectors experienced totally
different productivity trajectories over the past 50 years.

[^1]: We compute productivity using the Bureau of Economic Analysis national and industry accounts data. Labor productivity is real value added divided by full-time-equivalent (FTE) employees. The change in total factor productivity (which we convert to an index level) is the
growth rate in value added minus a weighted sum of the growth rates of labor and capital. The
weights in a given year are the cost shares of the factor inputs, averaged across the current
and prior year in the usual Divisia fashion. Labor costs are total labor compensation plus 67
percent of proprietor’s income. (We base the 0.67 multiplier on labor’s historical share of
income being roughly two-thirds.) Capital costs are the sum of depreciation, the product of the
real interest rate and the current value of installed capital, and 33 percent of proprietor’s
income. Analogous productivity series computed using gross output rather than value added
(and in the case of TFP, subtracting the implied contribution of intermediate inputs) show
similar patterns. We explore the trends in gross output, value added, and intermediate
materials in the construction sector in more detail below.

Construction’s poor performance might be just a curiosity if it were a
trivial fraction of economic activity, but it is not. The sector’s value added
averaged 4.3 percent of GDP between 1950 and 2020. This share, while
experiencing fluctuations, has remained fairly steady over the long-run.
Construction is a sizable share of aggregate output. It is large enough that its
poor productivity performance noticeably drags down aggregate productivity
growth. Construction labor productivity fell at an average rate of about 1
percent per year from 1970-2020. Had it instead grown at the (relatively
modest) rate of 1 percent per year, annual aggregate labor productivity growth
would have been roughly 0.18 percent higher.[^2] This would have resulted in
current aggregate labor productivity (and plausibly, income per capita) being
about 10 percent higher than it actually was.
While we focus in this paper on U.S. construction sector, the problem of
laggard construction productivity growth appears more widespread. In the 29
countries for which the OECD reports construction sector value added per
employee growth data over 1996-2019, 16 of the countries—as well as the EU27 area as a whole—saw negative average labor productivity growth in their
construction sectors over that 25-year period.[^3]

Even in countries that saw positive construction productivity growth, it
typically substantially lagged overall productivity growth in their economies.
Average labor productivity growth across all 29 countries was 0.4 percent per
year, in contrast to those countries’ average overall labor productivity growth
rates of 1.6 percent over the same period. The phenomena we explore at a
detailed level within the U.S. may well apply more broadly. Their full
international extent is worthy of future inquiry.

[^2]: This is calculated by multiplying the notional 2 percentage point increase in construction
labor productivity growth by its average Domar weight (the sector’s gross output as a share of
GDP) of 0.090. This weight—see Domar (1961)—is the first-order approximation of the
contribution of a sector or industry’s productivity growth to aggregate productivity growth.
[^3]: We use the “Productivity and ULC by Main Economic Activity” data from the OECD for these
computations.


## The Failure of Capital-Based Explanations for the Decline

First, we address perhaps the most obvious potential source of poor
productivity growth, a lack of capital investment. If laggard investment led to
lower capital-to-labor ratios, it would directly affect labor productivity. This
could also influence TFP, if TFP were partially capital-embodied (Hulten, 1992).
At first glance, though, this does not seem consistent with data for the
construction industry. Figure 2 compares changes in the construction sector’s
current-value capital stock to that of the entire economy. While capital in
construction did not grow as steadily as capital in the wider economy,
construction’s total capital stock growth since 1950 has actually been a bit
larger, rising 7.8-fold as opposed to the 6.5-fold increase for total capital in the
economy. There was no noticeable slowdown in capital growth after 1970, when
sector productivity started to fall. Moreover, capital intensity—capital stock per
FTE employee—did not fall in the sector relative to the overall economy. To the
contrary, it actually rose a bit faster.

A more nuanced view of capital’s role in construction productivity would
include intangible capital, which by definition is not contained in the capital
series above. We can look, however, at what the BEA terms the capital stock of
intellectual property (IP) products in the industry. The BEA defines this
category of capital assets as including the capitalized value of R&D, software
purchases, and—perhaps less relevant to construction—artistic originals.
Following work like Brynjolfsson, Rock, and Syverson (2021), we can use IP
capital stock as a proxy for intangible capital in the industry (which would
include things like know-how, organizational strength, trade secrets, buyersupplier relationships, sector-specific human capital, and so on).
The U.S. construction sector is less IP-capital-intensive than the
economy overall. For instance, in 2020 IP capital accounted for 4.0 percent of
the sector’s total capital stock, while the same ratio for the broader economy
was 7.4 percent. On a per-employee basis, IP intensity in construction is an
order of magnitude smaller than in the rest of the economy.[^4]

However, the IP capital data in the construction sector are not really
consistent with intangible capital driving the path of construction productivity,
either. The sector had no recorded IP capital in the national accounts until 1970.
Thus, throughout the 1950-1970 period when the sector’s productivity
growth kept up with or even exceeded aggregate productivity growth, there was
no strong indication that the sector was putting into place large intangible
investments. Only after the productivity slowdown had begun did the sector
begin to invest in IP capital, and despite accumulating such capital at a rate
exceeding that in the overall economy, the sector’s productivity level continued
to diverge from aggregate productivity growth.

## The Traditional Confound: Measurement Problems

Because productivity is a residual—the variation in output unexplained by variation in measured inputs—mismeasurement of either output or inputs
will be labeled productivity, even if unrelated to the actual efficiency of the
production process. Understatements of output or overstatements of inputs
would cause measured productivity to be lower than true productivity, so it is
important to think about whether such issues might explain the patterns in
construction.

[^4]: Though part of this enormous difference is accounted for by the inclusion of the residential
housing stock in economy-wide capital, which is limited in its market-activity marginal
product.

We start from the observation in Syverson (2017) that attributing a
change in productivity to mismeasurement requires not just establishing the
presence of mismeasurement, but also a change in the amount of
mismeasurement in the necessary direction at the same time as the measured
productivity change. If we are to explain the reversal in productivity growth in
construction in the late 1960s as resulting from measurement problems, we need to demonstrate that some combination of growth in the understatement of
output or overstatement of input occurred in the late 1960s.

We first consider labor input measurement. There are several plausible
channels for labor measurement difficulties in construction, including a higher
than average frequency of employees working irregular hours, contractor labor
that may be misclassified by survey respondents, and, especially in more
recent decades, labor supplied by undocumented workers.

Figure 3 plots three series for labor inputs in the construction sector: the
sum of full-time and part-time employees (from the BEA), FTE employees (also
from the BEA), and total employment (from the Current Employment Statistics
of the BLS). These series capture different elements of labor inputs, such as the
implied differential treatment of hours per worker when comparing summed
full-time and part-time employees with FTE employees.

None of the series shows an obvious kink in the late 1960s. Moreover,
they track one another closely, with no divergence at the time construction
productivity started falling. The average pairwise correlations among the three
series before 1970 is 0.983 and is 0.999 from 1970 on. In addition, the average
annual growth rates of all three series were lower after 1970 than before. A
mismeasurement-driven productivity slowdown would imply inputs that are
growing misstatedly fast—that measured labor accelerated rather than
decelerated as the data seem to show.

Given our earlier discussion about the trajectory of the construction
industry’s capital stock, mismeasurement of capital also seems unlikely to
explain the measured productivity declines. Moreover, capital measurement
problems cannot be responsible for labor productivity mismeasurements, and
labor productivity in construction exhibits the same broad pattern as does TFP
(and likewise for intermediate/materials inputs).
Given the lack of obvious issues with measured inputs, much of the
attention in the literature has centered on problems with measuring output.
As noted above, construction’s value added share of GDP exhibited no
long run trend over 1950-2020, so nominal construction value added grew at a
similar rate to the overall economy. The components of this ratio are both
nominal values, so the measured slowdown must, mechanically, be coming
from differences in the output price deflators.[^5]

Indeed, the construction sector’s output deflator and the aggregate GDP
deflator clearly start to diverge after the late 1960s. From 1950-69, the average
annual growth rates of the construction and GDP deflators were almost
identical—2.40 percent and 2.42 percent. From 1970 on, however, the GDP
deflator averaged annual growth of 3.37 percent, while the construction value
added deflator grew 5.47 percent per year. This sustained 2.1 percentage point
annual difference means that even if nominal construction value added grows
at a similar rate to GDP, real construction value added would grow much more
slowly, and perhaps even fall.

This kink in the construction price deflator is also perhaps large enough
to quantitatively explain the observed downturn in construction productivity.
Figure 4 repeats the plot of Figure 1, except it computes real construction
output by deflating nominal construction value added with the GDP deflator
rather than the deflator for the construction sector. The difference is striking.
Now construction sector productivity grows throughout the entire 1950-2020
period, nearly matching the pace of overall productivity growth.
Clearly, the construction sector price deflator is, mechanically speaking,
a key source of the downturn in measured construction productivity.
Computing productivity by deflating nominal construction activity with the
whole-economy deflator makes the construction productivity series look like
overall productivity.

Note, however, that this is not evidence that we should use the aggregate
GDP deflator for the construction industry or that the construction deflator is
wrong. It could well be right and true construction productivity has, indeed,
fallen for 50 years. However, the fact that it matters so much puts onus on
those interested in understanding construction productivity to check the
deflator’s accuracy.

[^5]: The potential role of price deflators in real construction output measurement in earlier decades was taken up by Gordon (1968) and Pieper (1991).

This is why some of the most important work on construction
productivity in the existing literature, like Sveikauskas et al. (2016, 2018) and
Garcia and Molloy (2022), focuses on subsets of the construction industry
where they can build more accurate output price deflators to explore
productivity growth dynamics. This work has found that in such cases,
productivity declines are not as extreme in the last 30 years as suggested in
the aggregate data, and in some cases productivity was in fact growing (albeit
modestly). It is this idea that brings us to search for settings where we can
potentially get around the output deflator issues, as we do in Section IV below.

### Potential Sources of Growth in Construction Output Prices

Given that the construction sector output deflator is rising considerably
faster than prices in the rest of the economy, it is worth exploring whether
there are visible sources of this relative price increase.
A logical place to look is at construction input prices. If these are also
rising faster than the overall price level after 1970, it would be a clue as to the
origin of the fast-rising prices and declining real output of the sector.
We first look at construction’s intermediate inputs prices, using the
sector’s intermediate inputs deflator from the BEA’s KLEMS database. Figure 5
plots this deflator and its change since 1950, along with the construction
sector output and GDP deflators for comparison. It is readily apparent that
construction intermediates price growth has been on the order of price growth
in the overall economy rather than the faster growth measured in construction
output prices. Its time path overlaps considerably with the GDP deflator and
lags the construction output deflator.[^6]

[^6]: In separate work, we have looked at the PPIs of 10 major construction sector inputs over the
sample period. These are conceptual components of the intermediates deflator above. While
there is variation in the average growth rate of these inputs’ prices, their mean tracks the GDP
deflator, just as the intermediates deflator does.

We next look at relative labor prices by computing the nominal implied
salary per worker for the sector and comparing its trajectory to that for the
overall economy. We compute the implied salary as total labor compensation
plus 0.67 times sole proprietor income, divided by the sum of employees and
self-employed. The construction and overall-economy series track each other
quite closely throughout 1950-2020. Construction salary growth is higher, but
only slightly so (a difference of 0.14 percent in average annual growth rates).
Moreover, there is no obvious divergence after 1970. Given the 2.1 percentage
point average annual difference in construction and GDP deflators, this
difference in relative labor prices is less than a tenth of that. Thus it may
explain a part of the divergence in relative output prices, but this part is very
small.

Direct measures of industry-specific capital prices are not readily
available, but a prominent component of capital user costs is the depreciation
rate. We compute depreciation rates for both the overall economy and the
construction sector using BEA data on depreciation and capital stocks. While
annual depreciation rates are higher in construction than for the overall
economy, averaging 3.7 percent overall and 13.6 percent for construction over
1950-2020, there is no sign that changes in depreciation rates imply the
relative user costs of construction capital are rising. In fact, the gap between
construction and overall depreciation rates fell during the period, implying that
this major element of capital costs was becoming relatively cheaper in
construction. For the first five years of the period, the average difference
between the overall and construction depreciation rates was 13.5 percent. For
the last five years, it was 9.3 percent.

In sum, there is no obvious sign that changes in the relative prices of the
construction sector’s major inputs—intermediates, labor, and capital—drove
the observed growth of relative construction output prices.
If relative unit input prices do not account for the increase in
construction’s relative output price, perhaps markups rose instead. To explore
this possibility, we construct an approximation for markups by comparing
sector revenues to its total measured input costs. Construction input costs
include expenditures on intermediates (which we observe directly in the
KLEMS data), total payments to labor (the numerator in the average salary
calculation above), and payments to capital (depreciation plus the real interest
rate multiplied by the industry capital stock plus 0.33 times proprietor’s
income). We divide revenues by the sum of these input expenditures as a proxy
for markups.

The average of this markup ratio over 1950-2020 is 1.016, indicating a
modest average margin of 1.6 percent in the construction sector. This margin
has a slightly increasing trend of 0.024 percent per year. This corresponds to
growth in the average margin of 1.7 percent over the entire 70-year period. To
the extent this higher accounting margin reflects larger markups over costs,
some of the increase in construction’s relative output price came from growing
markups.

However, there are two important caveats to this interpretation. First,
this overall change is miniscule compared to the overall growth in construction
prices observed during the period. It is two orders of magnitude smaller than
the 2.1 percentage point annual growth in the relative price of construction
output after 1970. Second, this is an increase in construction’s absolute
markup. If markups are also increasing in the economy overall (see De Loecker, Eeckhout, and Unger, 2020, for evidence of this, at least since 1980), then there may be no increase in construction’s relative markup and hence relative prices.

In sum, our analysis to this point indicates that only a small part of the
large increase in relative output prices of the construction sector may come
from increased relative wages and (perhaps) higher markups. The vast majority of the increase in construction’s price deflator relative to average overall prices cannot be explained by increasing relative prices of construction inputs or markups.

This leaves a few possibilities to explain the divergence of the
construction output and GDP deflators. One is that construction sector
productivity did indeed fall, raising unit input requirements. Even though
prices per unit of inputs did not rise (or rise faster than other prices outside the construction sector), the unit costs of output would increase because construction firms would need to buy more inputs than before to build a unit of output.

Another possibility is that construction output price mismeasurement
became worse in the late 1960s. If, say, the quality of construction output
accelerated as did prices along with it, but the deflator does not properly
account for that quality difference, the increase in output quality would have to occur in a way that was not correlated with increases in construction input prices. But, increased output quality from using more expensive inputs (better materials, much more skilled labor, etc.) is not consistent with the input price evidence above that input prices have not moved together with output prices.

## Measuring Productivity in Physical Units

We next turn to methods that do not rely on output price measurement.
Our approach is to focus on a setting where output and productivity can be
measured in physical units rather than expenditure requiring a deflator.
Researchers have applied this approach in the broader productivity literature,
especially the part dealing with producer microdata, but of course doing so
relies on having a setting where individual units are measured and there is
reasonable homogeneity.[^7] In this section we consider a part of the construction
industry where those conditions might hold (loosely): home construction.
Output data are available for the U.S. housing construction industry not
just in value but in number of housing units as well. Exploring the evolution of
the industry’s productivity measured in houses per unit input, rather than
deflated house value per unit input, lets us track a measure of the efficiency of
the industry’s production process that does not rely on a price index.

[^7]: A few recent examples include De Loecker et al. (2016); de Roux et al. (2021), and Orr (forthcoming).

This advantage does come at an obvious cost, however. If the physical
housing units change in quality over time, then a given number of housing
units in one period will not be the same “real” quantity of housing as in
another period. And we know that the average attributes of houses have
changed over time; for instance, they have trended toward larger floor areas.
Given the amount of data available on homes, however, we can also explore
whether such changes materially affect the conclusions from using housingunit-based productivity measures.

Our output data come from annual housing completions reported by the
U.S. Census Bureau. These begin in 1968 and are broken out by number of
units per building: 1 unit, 2-4 units, and 5+ units. We combine this with CES
employment data for the housing construction industry. After 1990, the
employment data are reported separately by single-family and multi-family
housing construction sub-industries. An older employment series for all
residential construction activity extends from 1972-2002. It unfortunately
precludes a breakout into single- and multi-family construction and also
includes employment in repair and remodeling that is not reflected in the
Census housing construction output data. Nevertheless, it is instructive to
compare the (combined single- and multi-family housing construction) results
from this older series to the more precise values starting in 1990, and we do so
below.

Figure 6 shows the resulting annual productivity series, measured in
housing units per employee. Looking first at the two post-1990 series, while
there are some notably large swings in the average number of housing units
built per employee in both the single-family and multi-family housing
subindustries (the largest in each being troughs during the Great Recession),
there is no discernable upward trend over the three decades. Linear time
trends fit to both series have statistically significant and negative slopes. For
single-family housing, it is –0.023 (s.e. = 0.007) per year, and for multi-unit
housing the slope is –0.081 (s.e. = 0.037) per year. Average productivity in the
first five years of the single-family (multi-unit) series is 2.63 (10.6) units per
employee and in the last five years is 2.35 (10.0) units per employee.[^8]
Comparing the magnitudes of the negative trend estimates to the levels of these
productivity measures, housing productivity measured in units per employee is
declining at a rate of roughly –1 percent per year. This is about the same as
seen above in the broader construction sector and using deflated value to
measure output.

The older, 1972-2002 series exhibits, if anything, a stronger downward
trend than the other two series.[^9] The linear trend slope is -0.042 (s.e. = 0.005), and average units per worker in the first and last five years of the period are
respectively 3.1 and 2.1. Though it is worth noting that during the 1990-2002
period of overlap, this productivity measure is basically level.
These data offer a complementary view into stagnant or declining
construction productivity uninfluenced by price mismeasurement. The new
residential construction industry, at least, does not seem to be becoming more
efficient at building housing units.

As noted, however, the usefulness of physical-quantity-based
productivity measures depends on the homogeneity of the units across settings
and time. If housing units are getting better, the industry may be becoming
more productive in terms of housing quality produced with a unit of input, even
if the number of housing units per input has not increased.
One of the more obvious changes in housing units over the past several
decades has been the increase in floor space per unit. Houses have been
getting bigger. Data on the average square footage of completed single-family
housing units is available from 1973-2020, and it rose from 1660 ft2 to 2480 ft2
over that period. The average size of multi-family units rose as well, but more
moderately, from 1021 ft2 to 1121 ft2.

[^8]: As seen in the figure, since the Great Recession, houses per worker recovered to roughly their pre-Great Recession levels. Time will tell if this growth extends beyond the prior level or instead
merely returns to the long-run average.

[^9]: Because the employment data for this series includes not just single- and multi-family
housing employment but repair and remodeling employment as well, this extra employment not
generally dedicated to new home construction will cause the level of this productivity series to
be lower than either of the other two.

Recomputing our unit productivity series for residential construction as
square footage of housing per employee, of course, exhibits more positive
trends than do the housing-unit-based productivity values above (because the
floor area has been trending up). The question is how much, and whether the
prior significantly negative trends remain so.
The three series are in Figure 7. The significant downward trend seen in
the old series remains (the series now spans 1974-2002, as no average square
footage per unit for multi-family buildings was available before 1974). The
linear yearly trend coefficient is –30.8 ft2 per employee (s.e. = 9.4).
The newer series do see some changes relative to their units per
employee patterns. For multi-family housing, which had a negative and
significant trend in units per employee, the trend for square footage still has a
negative point estimate (–42.6) but is now insignificant (s.e. = 37.9). Singlefamily housing now has a positive and significant annual trend growth of 37.4
ft2 per employee (s.e. = 16.0).

The magnitudes are instructive, however. Average square footage built
per employee in single-family housing construction over 1990-2020 is 7120 ft2.
An annual trend growth of 37.4 ft2 per employee off that base is 0.5 percent per
year. So even in the most optimistic case, this is one quarter of the 2.0 percent
annual labor productivity growth in the overall economy during the period.[^10]

## Deteriorating Materials Productivity

Setting aside measurement problems, in this section we document a new type of productivity slowdown in the construction sector involving trends in the
way which the sector converts intermediate inputs into outputs.
One summary measure of this process is the ratio of the sector’s value
added to gross output. The difference between these two is expenditures on
intermediate inputs. Their ratio captures how much of the sector’s final
revenues are created through the application of value-added factors (labor and
capital) as opposed to purchased from outside the sector.

Value added as a share of gross output in construction rose over the
1950-2020 period, from a level just below 0.4 in the early years to just above
0.5. The period of highest growth is circa 1985 to 2000, after which the series
levels off. The sector has therefore shifted a greater portion of its final output
production to activities inside the sector, done by its own labor and capital. As
noted in Sveikauskas et al. (2018), specialized subcontractor labor is treated as
a purchased service (a type of intermediate input) in standard KLEMS
accounting. A shift toward less intensive use of subcontractors could account
for some of the sector’s shift toward a greater share of value added in gross
output.

[^10]: Recent work by Garcia and Molloy (2022) makes more elaborate corrections for housing quality changes and similarly find only modest deflator-driven understatement in official measures of the sector’s productivity growth. Schmitz (2020) has proposed that lack of competition, perhaps structurally supported by industry trade associations, could explain poor productivity growth in housing construction.

We break down this pattern further by looking at the separate
trajectories of the revenue shares of each of the three major inputs into gross
output (i.e., revenues): labor, capital, and intermediates.[^11] Intermediate inputs’
share fell throughout 1950-2020, from an average of 60.5 percent during the
first five-year period (1950-54) to 48.9 percent over the last five years. About
two-thirds of this 11.6 percentage point drop was recovered by labor inputs
taking a larger share (growing from 33.6 to 41.9 percent) and another third by
an increase in capital’s share (5.9 to 9.3 percent).

We can also look at intermediate input efficiency by computing the
relative growth of real gross output and real intermediates use. This growth in
“materials productivity”—output obtained per unit of intermediate input—is an
analog to the more commonly measured labor productivity.

[^11]: Results reported here are similar if we use inputs’ shares of sector costs instead of revenues, which is not surprising given the low and slow-changing markups we estimated above.

Materials productivity for both all industries and the construction sector
show an interesting pattern in Figure 8. Materials productivity in construction
looks much like labor productivity does, rising until the late 1960s, at which time the series turns downward and begins a half-century of decline. All
industries materials productivity, on the other hand, has a slow positive trend
throughout the entire 1950-2020 period.

This turnaround is curious, especially when paired with the result that
the sector’s value added as a share of its gross output is growing. Given that
the difference between these two values is intermediates purchases, this
implies that over time the sector has been spending less on inputs to produce a
given amount of gross output production. These productivity figures indicate
this reduction in input spending is not because the sector has become more
adept at converting intermediates into output (which would reduce the quantity
of intermediates required). Instead, it seems to embody a substitution effect: as
the industry became worse at converting intermediates into output, thereby
raising the implied (output) unit costs of intermediates, the industry has
shifted toward a more value-added-intensive production process.

## Productivity and Reallocation in Disaggregated Data

In this section we drill down below the sectoral aggregate data and
investigate patterns in the disaggregated numbers. Specifically, we test
whether, when there are producers with heterogeneous productivity levels, the
market reallocates activity away from lower-productivity producers and toward
higher-productivity producers. This would be consistent with efficiently
operating input and output markets in the sector. The productivity literature
has documented this reallocation mechanism as one way in which aggregate
productivity growth can rise (indeed, it would facilitate aggregate productivity
to grow even if no single producer’s productivity rises).[^12]



[^12]: This is sometimes referred to as the “between” mechanism (De Loecker and Syverson, 2021).


We employ the state-level output and employment data from the Census
of Construction conducted every five years from 1972 to 2017. Our analysis
assumes that construction inputs’ marginal products are positively correlated
with their average products. This would be the case, for example, if the production function were Cobb-Douglas, though this property holds for many
other production functions as well.

The testable empirical prediction of efficient reallocation is that states or
firms with higher construction productivity today should, all else equal, see
construction activity grow faster in the future, as additional resources are
moved to production in that setting.[^13]

Using the state-level output and employment data from the Census of
Construction, we first compute the labor productivity level (real net
construction value per employee) of the construction sector in each state and
census year. We then regress the future change in the state’s share of all US
net construction value on the labor productivity level in the baseline period.
With allocative efficiency, we should see a positive coefficient: states with
construction sectors that are initially higher productivity see an increase in
their share of total construction value.

We run this regression using data computed at two different timings. The
first uses a state-by-census-year panel that regresses the five-year change in
share of US construction value from year t to year t + 5 on the state’s
construction labor productivity in year t. We include year and state fixed effects
in this specification. We have data for 9 inter-census changes from 1972 to 2017. The second specification is similar, but uses only a single long-difference
of a state’s share spanning 1972 to 2017 and regresses it on the state’s 1972
construction labor productivity level.

The results are in Table 1. Column 1 shows the results from the panel;
column (2) reports the outcome of the long-difference specification. Neither
indicates the hypothesized positive relationship between initial productivity and
future growth. Both coefficients are negative, significantly so in the panel
regression.

Thus at best there is no clear relationship between the productivity of a
state’s construction sector and the amount of construction activity that state
should expect to gain, be it the near or distant future. If anything, resources
seem to move away from the more productive states.
This result may indicate the presence of market frictions that limit the
ability of the construction sector’s input and output markets to reallocate
activity toward higher-productivity uses. The failure of this market mechanism
blocks one of the two major channels through which productivity in an
industry can grow, and may be a partial explanation of the aggregate
productivity problems facing the industry.

[^13] This is akin to the “dynamic allocation” test done for U.S. hospitals in Chandra et al. (2016).

## Conclusion

Measured productivity performance in the construction sector has been
unusually awful for 50 years. This has caught economic researchers’ attention
before but has gained increasing attention in broader policy-related circles in
recent years. In this paper, we have updated some of this earlier work to show
that measurement problems alone likely cannot explain all of the decline and
that there are some problems facing productivity in the industry that have not
been documented previously.

First, from a purely accounting perspective, input-based explanations
simply cannot account for the half-century decline in productivity. Most of the
observed productivity decline results from the divergence between the
construction sector’s output price deflator from average price growth in the
economy. This is summarized by the fact that if nominal construction activity
is deflated by the GDP deflator instead of the sector-specific deflator, the path
of implied productivity in the sector is much closer to that observed in
economy-wide productivity. This importance of the deflator to the measured
decline is not itself evidence that the construction sector output deflator is
wrong, however.

Further exploring the deflator’s growth, we find that increases in input
unit prices do not seem to be driving its divergence. Either construction
productivity truly is declining, raising unit input requirements, or there is some
form of mismeasurement that is uncorrelated with higher input prices (i.e.,
ruling out quality-based explanations where the sector shifts to higher-quality
and more expensive inputs).

Several pieces of evidence suggest that measurement errors in the
deflator are not the sole cause of poor productivity performance in the sector.
When we measure productivity performance in physical units in a key industry
in the sector—residential housing construction—it also shows declining or
stagnant productivity.

The sector’s ability to transform intermediates into finished products has
deteriorated.
We also document evidence that something keeps producers in areas
where the sector is more productive from growing. Rather than construction
inputs flowing to areas where they are more productive, the activity share of
these areas either stagnates or even falls. This problem with allocative
efficiency may be accentuating the aggregate productivity problem for the
industry.

The productivity struggle is not just a figment of the data. It is real.
Further research is needed to test between competing explanations and
sharpen the picture of what has been happening in the sector. Certainly
construction is an important enough component of total economic activity to
warrant attention.

# References

Allen, Steven G. 1985. “Why Construction Industry Productivity Is Declining.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 67(4): 661-9.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Daniel Rock, and Chad Syverson. 2021. “The Productivity JCurve: How Intangibles Complement General Purpose Technologies.”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 13(1): 333-72.
Chandra, Amitabh, Amy Finkelstein, Adam Sacarny, and Chad Syverson. 2016.
“Health Care Exceptionalism? Performance and Allocation in the US
Health Care Sector.” American Economic Review, 106(8): 2110-44.
Changali, Sriram, Azam Mohammad, and Mark van Nieuwland. 2015. “The
Construction Productivity Imperative.” McKinsey Productivity Sciences
Center.
De Loecker, Jan, Jan Eeckhout, and Gabriel Unger. 2020. “The Rise of Market
Power and the Macroeconomic Implications.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 135(2): 561-644.
De Loecker, Jan, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Nina Pavcnik.
1.    “Prices, Markups, and Trade Reform.” Econometrica, 84(2): 445510.
De Loecker, Jan, and Chad Syverson. 2021. “An Industrial Organization
Perspective on Productivity.” In Handbook of Industrial Organization, Vol.
1. Kate Ho, Ali Hortaçsu, and Alessandro Lizzeri (eds.) Amsterdam: North
Holland.
de Roux, Nicolás, Marcela Eslava, Santiago Franco & Eric Verhoogen. 2021.
“Estimating Production Functions in Differentiated-Product Industries
with Quantity Information and External Instruments.” NBER Working
Paper 28323.
Domar, Evsey D. 1961. “On the Measurement of Technological Change.”
Economic Journal, 71(284): 709-29.
Economist. 2017. “Efficiency eludes the construction industry.” Economist, Aug
19, 2017.
20

Garcia, Daniel and Raven Molloy. 2022. “Can Measurement Error Explain Slow
Productivity Growth in Construction?” Working paper.
Gordon, Robert J. 1968. “A New View of Real Investment in Structures, 19191966.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 50(4): 417-28.
Hulten, Charles R. 1992. “Growth Accounting When Technical Change is
Embodied in Capital.” American Economic Review, 82(4): 964-80.
Pieper, Paul E. 1991. “The Measurement of Construction Prices: Retrospect and
Prospect.” in Fifty Years of Economic Measurement: The Jubilee of the
Conference on Research in Income and Wealth, Ernst R. Berndt and Jack
E. Triplett, eds. University of Chicago Press.
Orr, Scott. Forthcoming. “Within-Firm Productivity Dispersion: Estimates and
Implications.” Journal of Political Economy.
Potter, Brian. 2021. “Measuring Construction Efficiency.” Oct 22, 2021.
https://constructionphysics.substack.com/p/measuring-constructionefficiency.
Schmitz, James A. Jr. 2020. “Solving the Housing Crisis Will Require Fighting
Monopolies in Construction.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Working Paper No. 773.
Schriver, William R. and Roger L. Bowlby. 1985. “Changes in Productivity and
Composition of Output in Building Construction, 1972-1982.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 67(2): 318-22.
Smith, Noah. 2021. “What happened to construction productivity?” Blog post,
Sep 29, 2021. https://noahpinion.substack.com/p/what-happened-toconstruction-productivity.
Stokes, H. Kemble Jr. 1981. “An Examination of the Productivity Decline in the
Construction Industry.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 63(4): 495502.

21

Sveikauskas, Leo, Samuel Rowe, James Mildenberger, Jennifer Price, and
Arthur Young. 2016. “Productivity Growth in Construction.” Journal of
Construction Engineering and Management, 142(10): 04016045-1-8.
Sveikauskas, Leo, Samuel Rowe, James Mildenberger, Jennifer Price, and
Arthur Young. 2018. “Measuring Productivity Growth in Construction.”
Monthly Labor Review, January 2018: 1-33.
Syverson, Chad. 2017. “Challenges to Mismeasurement Explanations for the
US Productivity Slowdown.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(2): 16586.

22

Figure 1

Indexes of Value Added Per Worker and TFP, Overall U.S.
and Construction Sector (BEA Data)
300
250
200
150
100
50

Value Added per FTE GDP

Value Added per FTE Constr

TFP (Value Added) Economy

TFP (Value Added) Construction

Figure 2

Capital Stocks (2012 = 100), Total Economy and
Construction Sector
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

K idx Tot fixed assets

23

K idx Constr

Figure 3

Construction Sector Labor Inputs, Three Measures
9000
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000

FTPT Constr

FTE Constr

CES Empl Constr

Figure 4

Indexes of Value Added Per Worker and TFP, Overall U.S.
and Construction Sector (BEA Data)
300
250
200
150
100
50

Value Added per FTE GDP

Value Added per FTE (GDP defl) Constr

TFP (Value Added) Economy

TFP (Value Added, GDP defl) Construction

24

2019

2016

2013

2010

2007

2004

2001

1998

1995

1992

1989

1986

1983

1980

1977

1974

1971

1968

1965

1962

1959

1956

1953

1950

2000

Figure 5

Construction and GDP Output Price Index
Compared to Construction Intermediates Price
Index
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500

GDP Price Index

2019

2016

2013

2010

2007

2004

2001

1998

1995

1992

1989

1986

1983

1980

1977

1974

1971

1968

1965

1962

1959

1956

1953

1950

0

Construction Price Index

Construction Intermedites Price Index

Figure 6

Housing Units per Employee, Housing
Industry
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2

Units/L Single-Family

Units/L Multi-Family

25

Units/L All Units

2020

2018

2016

2014

2012

2010

2008

2006

2004

2002

2000

1998

1996

1994

1992

1990

1988

1986

1984

1982

1980

1978

1976

1974

1972

0

Figure 7

Square Footage of Housing per Employee, Housing
Industry
16000
14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020

0

Sq Feet/L All Units

Sq Feet/L Multi-Family

Sq Feet/L Single-Family

Figure 8

Materials Productivity (1950 = 100)
130
120
110
100
90
80
70

Materials Productivity All Industries

26

Materials Productivity Construction

2019

2016

2013

2010

2007

2004

2001

1998

1995

1992

1989

1986

1983

1980

1977

1974

1971

1968

1965

1962

1959

1956

1953

1950

60

Table 1. Change in State’s Share of U.S. Construction Value on Initial Labor
Productivity Level

ln(state’s real net construction
value per employee)t

(1)
Change in state’s
share of U.S. net
construction, year t
to t+5 (percent)
-2.92
(0.48)

(2)
Change in state’s
share of U.S. net
construction,
1972-2017 (percent)
-2.40
(3.01)

Year FE
State FE
N

Yes
Yes
459

No
No
51

27

